hello and welcome to topcast for a
special rather quick off the cuff
episode about a recent video i saw by
euron brooke it was a very short video
and it's euron brooke
calling out sam harris about something
or other he's responding to
a question he gets from his audience and
i just thought it was worth exploring
this you know personally if i need to
know something about economics or
financial matters then i like to listen
in to euron brooke i think he's one of
the clearest most articulate voices on
these particular topics anywhere at all
sam harris is someone who i tune into
whenever there's some sort of religious
violence i like to hear his take on
these things he's extremely clear when
it comes to some of the most important
dangers of our time so sam harris and
euron brooke are two iconoclastic
thinkers and podcasters existing in what
might be broadly called the intellectual
web space i support both of them i
listen to both of them as regularly as i
am able to amidst making my own content
which is usually so time consuming as to
make this regularity and for listening
to other people's podcasts less regular
than i might otherwise prefer so if one
of my favorite podcasters calls out
another one of my favorite podcasters my
ears tend to prick up i don't always
find this a great way of doing
philosophy for what that's worth but
simultaneously i do kind of like
watching reaction videos so i thought
i'd kind of make a reaction video it's
not a video so much as just audio this
time around as people can see now sam
did in fact well sam has over the years
made some remarks about iron rand
objectivism and objectivists
and i think this might have been a
really useful more useful for euron's
time to engage with i think that could
be more illuminating for the audience in
fact i think an excellent guest for sam
on the making sense podcast would indeed
be euron
but an issue which happens sometimes
with objectivists is this close focus on
the personal at times when it should be
on the ideas i think the ideas should be
considered to be out there like a
physical object to some extent analyzed
like we would analyze a scientific
theory you know when we talk about the
content of general relativity we don't
think about what einstein really meant
by what he said about general relativity
we just talk about general relativity at
least physicists engaged in discussions
about trying to move the frontiers
forward of general relativity too we
don't consult the original texts and so
if sam says something about ironrand
objectivists i think it's better if you
just consult what einrand actually said
herself rather than a summary of what
she might have said and similarly
trying to discuss what sam harris kind
of might have meant rather than taking a
quote of his and analyzing it i think
would be much more useful and i think
both sam and euron have made this error
this era of not taking a quote and
dissecting the quote and usually a
lengthy quote just taking a quote out of
context is not going to be useful at all
of course so what i'm going to do today
is after a lengthy breakdown of what i
think the issue is i'm going to come
back and not merely quote euron but have
him speak in his own words and then
dissect that not sentence by sentence
but dissect it maybe paragraph by
paragraph something like that so i'm not
going to be saying what euron intended
i'm just going to listen to what euron
said and say what i think about the
content of
what he's actually saying so let's get
to my lengthy introductory remarks which
are about computational universality
and the human brain or the human mind
more importantly this
mind-body distinction which is really
the mind-brain distinction has long
plagued philosophers it arises in part
because our sense of self which is to
say consciousness
seems so obvious to us the mind is in a
sense the thing that is always there and
that thing of which we find it most
difficult to conceive of possibly being
an error about namely that our own minds
exist or that we could possibly be
mistaken about the contents or character
of our own minds and yet simultaneously
we do not feel as if the mind is simply
made of matter it's just a part of our
body apparently there are some people
that exist out there i've heard there
are some neuroscientists out there who
insist that the mind reduces to
something like just the firing of
synapses in the brain
but in truth it's difficult to find
actual examples of people like this out
in the wild making this claim you know
sam harris for example is a prominent
neuroscientist who has written much on
the topic and in many moods strongly
hints that at least part of what passes
for mind
isn't really material for example
whatever consciousness is
sam like many others will also argue
that consciousness is somehow prior to
the mind the mind insofar as it consists
of thoughts ideas and intentions is not
identical to consciousness those things
thoughts ideas and intentions are merely
the contents of consciousness
consciousness is more like a stage
sometimes there is nothing on it
sometimes there is but it is not the
same thing as the actors and the set
pieces that appear on it mind can be
empty even if it is conscious and in
those times we experience something like
pure consciousness on this view but as
he often argues anyone skilled enough to
clean the stage of actors and set pieces
will find that something unbidden
generally makes an appearance on that
stage it is difficult not to be caught
up with identifying oneself with
thinking the things on the stage
maybe we are just the stage or maybe we
are the actors and set pieces that
appear there or maybe we're both we know
little about this and language here is
barely fit for purpose when considering
the nature of consciousness itself but
there are some things we can say
even if we cannot say what consciousness
is there is an epistemological standard
yes
admit to what we are ignorant of but
simultaneously take very seriously what
we do know in the popularian sense what
we know is what we have a good
explanation for and which could turn out
to be false but in the meantime if and
until it is shown to be false we should
take seriously what we know so what do
we know about this stuff called minds
and bodies or minds and brains the mind
whatever it turns out to be when we
understand it better still is something
that the brain does but can we be
somewhat more precise than this well we
could entertain wild fantasies as some
people sometimes do but the brain is
just some kind of aerial or antenna
which tunes into some universal mind and
receives thoughts from elsewhere there
is no evidence of this there is little
to be gained by asserting this it raises
more problems than what it solves for
example by what energy source waves
presumably some kind of electromagnetic
radiation are those signals being sent
and received what is the frequency if
it's not photons then what why does this
signal not interfere with any other kind
of material except human brains what is
the source of these thoughts if not our
brains how were they then generated it's
like a god of the gaps this brain as
antenna theory it obscures more than it
clarifies is there anything better that
sounds scientific that is scientific
well yes and we are very familiar with
it the scientific idea is that the brain
is made of matter it is literally
hardware and the mind is software a kind
of program running on the brain now
immediately many balk at the notion many
rejected outright naively they might say
but my laptop cannot think and my laptop
is the sum of software running on
hardware ergo
i'm not software running on hardware but
this would be just as if to say my
computer never runs simulations of
galaxy collisions so simulations of
galaxy collisions are not possible even
in principle but just because one is not
familiar with what is possible in
principle much less in practice with a
computer is no refutation of the idea it
is indeed possible and in terms of
galaxy collisions on a computer yes they
are run every day on many computers
around the world they are possible to do
now we should just pause here by the way
and i'll come back to this that's
simulating two galaxies colliding in a
computer and two galaxies out there in
the universe actually colliding in space
are two very different things we have to
return to this because although
simulating some things in a computer is
not the same as the thing itself there
are exceptions to this rule for example
now just imagine finding the sum of a
list of numbers on a piece of paper so
that's happening in physical reality and
then simulating that process in a
computer using a spreadsheet the
outcomes of the addition are identical
and there's no sense in which the
simulated thing and the so-called real
physical thing are different we might
also consider the case of what might be
called a recursive computer game or a
game within a game people might be
familiar with minecraft which is an
online game which is a virtual world
where people can build things and people
have built fully functioning computers
within minecraft a fully functioning
abstract computer in the purely online
minecraft world which can simulate
anything a normal computer can including
an online virtual minecraft world
playing a game of minecraft on a
computer in the game minecraft is to
play the actual game minecraft
they are one and the same as i'll say
we'll come back to this later the
question that will become relevant to
this discussion of the mind-body problem
and the relevance of computation is what
is it that a computer can simulate
can it simulate brains and minds well
let's take a step back what is a
computer and what is it capable of well
a computer is just a device that can
compute
okay so that's circular what does it
mean to compute well
counting is a computation you can use
your fingers to count one two three four
you can do it yourself the fingers are
the computer and counting is the
computation a computation is a process
of taking an input and performing some
operation and getting an output alan
turing among others the others include
charles babbage ada lovelace and alonzo
church investigated computers and
computing early on as a theory to see
what was possible mathematically with
these things called computers especially
universal computers now from here on in
when i use the word computer by the way
you should just assume that i mean
universal computer a universal computer
is a computer that can do anything any
other computer can do which is
approximately what anyone who has a
computer sitting on their desk has these
days you've got approximately a
universal computer whatever is made of
matter can be simulated by a computer
there's a claim that claim was
originally made as far as i know by
turing let's just assume it's turing
it's usually called turing's conjecture
something like that so turing's
conjecture anything out there any
physical process stuff made of matter
can be simulated by a computer
one might well say so much for
conjectures
but it was no random conjecture it was a
conjecture with a practical purpose like
so many conjectures in science and
mathematics given the fact that there
were indeed mathematical curiosities for
the most part which were not computable
but the laws of physics on the other
hand they consisted of mathematical
relationships analytic functions to be
precise that are all computable so if
matter
physical stuff is indeed governed by
laws of physics then it is more than
reasonable to presume that anything made
of matter will do things that can be
simulated computed by a computer but
actually we can do one better than this
in about 1985 david deutsch using the
laws of quantum theory proved turing's
conjecture
and so now it's called in some circles
not merely a conjecture turing's
conjecture but the church turing deutsch
principle deutsche's great insight was
to recognise that computation requires a
computer and a computer is made of
matter so computation is inherently a
physical process not a purely abstract
one governed by any set of pure
mathematical concepts you like whatever
computers can do in our world is
governed by laws of physics for some of
the history of this michael nielsen's
got an excellent article that i'll link
to underneath this and david himself
also had some things to say about this
and wrote some things about this in his
talk the mathematician's misconception
where he said that he basically proved
the principle now what would he say is
prove the principle what
prove means here is beginning with
quantum theory one can derive turing's
conjecture turing's principle sometimes
other people when they say stuff like
well the principle needs to be proved is
i think they think that it must mean
something like show to be true
finally once and for all but that's an
impossibly high standard for proof even
pythagoras's theorem cannot reach that
pythagoras theorem has been proved but
not proved true if you assume that the
axioms are true and then of course the
conclusion namely pythagoras theorem
then turns out to be true on the
condition that the axioms are true but
you can't prove the axioms is true
that's the whole point of them being
axioms they're sometimes simply called
assumptions so on the assumption that
quantum theory is true for now it's our
best working theory of physical reality
given that assumption given quantum
theory you can prove turing's conjecture
that any physical process can be
simulated by a computer now because
one begins with the laws of quantum
theory and one derives turing's
principle that means the turing's
principle amounts to being a law of
physics
why
because it has been derived from what we
already know to be the laws of physics
the quantum laws of physics the most
fundamental of all the laws of physics
it's provably the case or more
succinctly it is provably the case given
quantum theory that any physical system
can be simulated by a computer
now that computer could be operating
according to classical laws by the way
but it could also be operating according
to quantum physical laws in which case
we'd have a quantum computer and many
such processes that the computer might
be used to simulate could be simulated
efficiently or timely or quickly if you
like the problem with a classical
computer is that if it tries to simulate
a quantum system like say the
interaction between the electrons
forming a bond and an oxygen molecule
the computer will be able to do that
simulation but only very slowly because
it's not a quantum computer and it's
trying to figure out all of these
interactions in the quantum realm when
it's only operating by classical
principles but a quantum computer could
do something like that efficiently we
say whatever the case we can show that
all universal turing computers can
simulate all physical processes anything
the movement and interaction of atoms
the mechanics of a piston in the engine
of a car the trajectory of a bullet as
it leaves a rifle the movement of
planets in the solar system galaxy
collisions anything at all made of
matter all one needs is a program to run
instructions for the computer so if we
want to simulate a bullet leaving a
rifle and finding where it lands we need
a program a bit of code the software
which would describe things like well
the mass of the bullet and density of
the air the acceleration due to gravity
the initial velocity of the bullet and
the program would also of course need to
have encoded in it the relevant laws of
motion in this case newtonian physics
would more than do the job the computer
could then render the path of the bullet
on the screen and output the initial and
final positions of the bullet and
anything else along the way indeed this
is an example of just that kind of thing
for anyone to play with it's it's at
this website called fit which is physics
education technology so computers can
simulate things out there in the
physical world anything all you need is
to know how to code it computers can
simulate anything made of matter as i
keep saying but i left one thing off the
list didn't i one important thing
human brains
computers can simulate human brains
because they're made of matter in
principle at least it must be the case
that human brain and all its activity
could be simulated by a computer in just
the way a galaxy could be simulated in a
computer because it's just at root atoms
jiggling around but that problem would
be intractable as we say needing to
simulate the jiggle of every single atom
in the brain ridiculous could there be a
more efficient way after all to simulate
bullets we don't have to simulate the
jiggling of all the atoms that make up
the bullet we just assume the bullet is
a single indivisible particle and get
precisely the same answer as we get in
real life were we to fire an actual
bullet maybe we could just simulate all
the neurons in a brain rather than all
the atoms that's certainly an
improvement by many orders of magnitude
of complexity again it must be possible
simulating anything made of matter is
possible because the laws of physics say
that it is and it's provably the case
but here's the thing about the brain
it's not just like any other physical
system like bullets moving through the
air it is doing abstract things it is
thinking it is guessing it is
calculating observing in someone it is
taking in data processing it and then
generating output that already sounds
rather like a computer no well that's
because it is a computer but not just
any computer it's not like your laptop
your laptop cannot think creatively but
your brain can your mind can that's the
difference but it doesn't make it any
less of a computer it makes it more of a
computer a computer plus some stuff it's
rather like not all cars are equal you
can have a toy car it's still a car and
then you can have a tesla you can have
all these different kinds of cars some
are qualitatively different to others
some computers are qualitatively
different to others some computers are
single use computers some computers are
universal in the future we might have
computers that are able to run human
minds now of course we could as i just
said in principle just simulate all the
atoms in a brain and so simulate a brain
and so whatever the brain was doing in
reality it would be able to do in the
simulation if the brain we simulated was
thinking then the thing in the
simulation would be thinking too if you
do not think this is correct then you
have to explain why the laws of physics
do not apply to human brains there is
something that the brain is doing that
you must insist is not determined by the
laws of physics you are saying the brain
is outside the laws of physics because
we have already admitted there is a
mathematical proof from the laws of
quantum physics of the turin conjecture
which make it a principle that says
anything that happens in physical
reality can be simulated by a computer
obeying those quantum laws of physics
which all computers are actually doing
there is no getting around this what i
am getting at is that all physical
processes can be considered as a kind of
computation the initial conditions are
like the input the laws are like the
program and the output is the final
state of the system this is no accident
but a deep symmetry now the lesson of
that is not that the universe as a whole
is some kind of computer or a simulation
or anything like that the lesson is that
universal computers are capable within
this universe of simulating those laws
and with arbitrarily high accuracy as we
say they're able to simulate any
physical process now the minor wrinkle
here is of course that it could be the
case that quantum theory is completely
wrong
but we cannot proceed in our
understandings of the world now by
simply throwing up our hands and saying
well this all might be completely wrong
it might be but we want to understand
the things now as best we can now and to
do that we should take seriously our
best explanations of the world now and
besides if quantum theory turns out to
be wrong entirely well okay let's deal
with that then but turning out wrong can
also turn out wrong in a technical sense
it might not be utterly overturned but
simply subsumed into a deeper theory
that includes it and let's say gravity
together in which case computation would
be almost entirely unaffected preserved
in its present state more or less and is
simply corrected by some amount of
gravity when that's taken into account
so
we possibly shouldn't need to presume
that gravitational effects on quantum
computers are going to substantially
affect the argument about brains being a
kind of computer at the more local level
they might but this would be like saying
that general relativity was going to
utterly overturn what we understood the
motion of cars on streets or basketballs
on courts to be once we had that new
theory of gravity overturning newton's
laws the human brain must be able to be
simulated in a computer because there is
a law of physics that says this is
possible in principle whether it is
actually done in practice in the next
few years or decades or centuries is an
open question and is also beside the
point the principle itself means that
whatever a brain can do a computer can
do because a computer can in principle
do anything that any other physical
system can do including a brain denying
this is just an appeal to the
supernatural
brains are
physical now no existing computer can do
this because we do not have the program
and we expect that the program won't
require simulating individual atoms or
even individual neurons it will require
rather the program that does what our
minds do the mind is the software
running on the hardware of the brain so
we can just ignore the brain we can skip
straight to whatever it is the mind does
and what the mind does is among other
things create knowledge i say among
other things because the defining
characteristic of the human mind is its
capacity to generate explanatory
knowledge or as some people like to say
to reason but using reason for that
purpose indeed it is a universal
explanation generator see my other video
called the nexus for more on that now
just before i get to exploring what
euron has said on all this i should say
that although i say and endorse the view
that the laws of physics determine what
the brain does that's a form of
determinism this is utterly different
and it does not mean i do not endorse
free will i do and the reason is because
determinism something determining what
happens next is not the same as
explaining what happens so although the
laws of physics mandate what happens in
the brain that's that's inescapable the
laws of physics mandate anything that
happens anywhere in the physical
universe that doesn't matter it's
irrelevant to this particular question
of what explains what's going on in the
mind different different question so
although the laws of physics determine
what happens from brain state to brain
state they do not explain what happens
in the mind they cannot explain why one
makes this choice as compared to that
choice okay putting that aside just so
we recognize that i am on side with both
the determinists who think that
everything is determined from one moment
to the next according to the laws of
physics but also i'm on the side of
people who believe and the reality of
emergent phenomena these two things can
co-exist and must coexist because we
live in a universe where they do
co-exist okay let's turn now to what
euron had to say
okay so here's the video
where it says our brains are meat
computers or that's the claim that's
being made of what sam harris said the
first thing i'd say is is that a true
picture of sam harris because if it's
not if it's been doctored in some way i
think that is unethical and it should be
changed i just never have seen sam
smile in that way so anyway let's um
have a look at what is said here
sam howard says our brains are just meat
computers this strikes me as crude but
is there truth to it no there isn't
truth to it because okay so immediately
ron says there's no truth to it there is
truth to it there is truth to it because
as i've already explained every single
physical process can be considered as a
computation of a kind and what the brain
does is taking inputs and
then process those inputs and provide
relevant outputs whether the input is
light and you process that and you
realize there is an obstacle in your way
and so the output is you moving your
feet in a different direction to avoid
the obstacle now euron is absolutely
hooked on this idea as will become
apparent
of a computer being a silicon thing now
if what euron is saying to be as
generous as possible that a computer
must be a silicon device well
of course the brain is not a silicon
device but that cannot be what sam
harris said if indeed he said anything
like this at all let's assume that
the claim is that he said it was a meat
computer a lot of people have said that
the brain is some sort of wet wear okay
it's a kind of computer that that
doesn't use silicon it uses some other
kind of hardware it uses neurons as the
computational thing so to reject this
computational universality is a big
claim from euron let's keep going
it conflates
electronics it conflates zero ones with
biology
now it doesn't conflate electronics with
biology at all
there there is
no dispute here indeed if we really
wanted to get down to it
we could say that there is indeed
electronics inside the brain the neurons
are electrical conduits what do you
think neurotransmitters are it is it is
electrical crackles as david deutsch
likes to say so there really is a form
of electronics going on there and yes
computers use zeros and ones there has
to be some way that the brain processes
information and the information has to
reduce to something the idea is reduced
to something whether it's in a computer
or in a brain it's just that we're
conscious of these thought processes but
at root there must be some sort of
processing going on
and i just don't think that you are the
same
now
i am not you know you can't reduce
every biological phenomena to just zero
once and and if you did you couldn't
explain never mind explain consciousness
you couldn't explain life
now you can't explain but that they are
two different claims about the world
you can't explain life you can't you
can't explain much at all using nothing
but the laws of physics but the laws of
physics are universal apply everywhere
and at all times
that does not mean you can explain
why
the second world war happened what the
events in the second world war were or
why the second world war came to a
conclusion despite the fact the laws of
physics mandated everything that
happened and governed everything that
happened it wasn't like anything
supernatural was happening because those
are your only two options either things
are obeying the laws of physics natural
laws
or
something
violating natural laws is happening and
that didn't happen during the second
world war so two things can be true
simultaneously both the laws of physics
determine what happens from moment to
moment and the best explanation of what
is happening is not the laws of physics
it's namely things at the higher
emergent level you can have both of them
you need to have both of them to have a
coherent view of reality and so too with
what people do the laws of physics
mandate things and not only do they
mandate things there is actually a
specific law of physics in the form of
this turing deutsche church principle
that says that every physical system
that exists including the human brains
including human brains must be able to
be simulated by a computer
you can explain
of course you can't explain free will
but you can't explain life
why something's alive and other things
not alive
is it just the zero ones
again there are going to be open
questions even if you say the laws of
determine everything that doesn't get
you far okay this is why
i say that although i'm a determinist it
doesn't add anything to
many of these discussions at all it
doesn't answer all of your questions if
you say the laws of physics mandate
everything that happens from here on in
that that explains very very little
except
some fundamental interactions of let's
say things moving under almost
exclusively the the
the action of gravity or subatomic
particles for for most other things that
are more complex you need the higher
more emergent
explanation
because the predictive deterministic
view is not what you're after so too
we're trying to understand things like
the origin of life free will
consciousness all of this sort of stuff
although it must all be mandated by the
laws of physics it cannot violate the
laws of physics it does it is not
explained by and so
although we can say the
human mind the human brain
is a computer operating according to the
laws of physics and that's true and it
is a computer it doesn't explain the
contents of the mind it doesn't explain
what thoughts you have from one moment
to the next so sam harris is not wrong
he's just maybe putting the emphasis in
a different place
there's something that happens when you
combine certain chemicals
certain chemicals
that
you know have biological
decree that when you combine them create
a biological thing
and that's different than just
the electrons and the atoms moving
around certain combinations have
emergent properties
it's not different too
it's the same as but you can describe
these things in two different ways
so when a chemist is describing a
chemical reaction they could reduce
things to what is happening at the level
of the electrons they could talk about
the entire molecules or indeed they
could talk about solutions into flasks
being mixed together they are all
different ways of understanding this
thing this thing called the chemical
reaction and so too
with the action of what's going on with
a human brain you would be
wrong in a sense to
try and reduce what's going on in the
brain to the jiggling of atoms as i said
earlier you might even be wrong to
explain it in terms of
ones and zeros being processed by
neurons but it's not to say that those
things are false it is the jiggling of
atoms it is the processing of bits of
information
but it's also at the level of ideas and
thoughts running through the mind being
subjected to
critical
reasoning
creative conjecturing all that sort of
stuff is going on in the level at the
level of the mind as well it's not to
say that any of them are false it just
depends on what level of analysis you
want
and you can't
and the emergence is not an emergence of
the zeros and ones
which is what a computer is
the emergent is it emergent from
the interaction of biological components
of chemical
interactions and to boil that down to a
computer that just is
zero ones
is i think a massive mistake and just
and just wrong
but a computer can be talked about as
not just zeros and ones it doesn't have
to be this
simple fundamental object that euron's
talking about
after all
if you're watching
something like a movie on your laptop
there's a sense in which it's nothing
but zeros and ones being processed
leading to sound coming out of the
speakers and pixels flicking on and off
on the screen there's a sense in which
that's true that's what the movie is but
it would be the wrong level of analysis
to try and explain the story via that
but it's not to say that it's not a
computation that's going on it is a
computation that's going on the movie is
a computation if you're watching it on a
computer even if you're watching it on a
television screen as well
but it doesn't mean that that's the only
way to understand what's going on here
even though it's a fundamental truth a
fundamental truth of the matter is when
you watch a movie that you've downloaded
from the internet on your computer
that's a computation that's what's
happening
the computer is still a computer your
laptop is still a laptop and the movie
is the output of the computation from
the computer
so too with our minds the output of a
computation the brain is a computer that
is leading to the output
which is our thoughts and ideas and
feelings and intentions and so on and so
forth the creativity and free will that
euron values so much and which i would
agree with him on it's just that you
don't have to say sam harris is
completely wrong about this thing that
it's a meat computer it is a meat
computer but it's not only that okay
we're wrong to say that it's only that
and sam i think would be the first to
admit that it's not only that there's
more to it you can appreciate these
levels of emergence as euron is saying
here just that i would say to euron you
also have to appreciate the fundamental
reductive vision as well these things
are both ways in which we come to have a
complete
understanding of reality none of them
should be privileged except given
particular contexts if you're trying to
understand why someone makes this
decision over that decision trying to
understand what's going on to level the
atoms or the neurons or the bits being
processed inside of the brain yeah of
course that's going to be wrong
but that's not to say that it's false
it's just that it won't give you the
best explanation the best explanation of
what's going on for that you need to
talk about the person's mind at the
level of their ideas the mistakes that
they're making the things they're
getting correct and so on and so forth
their deployment of reason
and and i was i was
really interested in this one
scientist that i saw a lecture of his
and he is a
uh he's just built a chemical computer
but his goal in life is to create life
and his approach to creating life is not
to build a
supercomputer his approach to creating
life is to try to
figure out
the
the chemistry of life
the chemical components the chemical
structure the way to structure
components in a way that that generates
life and he wants to create life
but chemically and i think
i think there's a massive mistake that
goes on by that sam makes by thinking
that everything is just
is just zero ones and that there's no
emergent
phenomena emerging
that associated with the biology not
just with the electrons moving around
and i think our brain is filled with
immersion properties and filled with
complexity
and and they're things we don't
understand we don't understand
consciousness
from the perspective of
the causes of it instead what it does
but what generates it how it comes about
and the same with free will how it comes
about
what is it an immersion property of
other than say it's an emerging property
of a living being with a certain level
of
like a human being
i agree with that we we don't understand
free will we don't understand
consciousness some people reject one or
both of these it's bizarre i endorse
both of them but also we don't even
understand how ideas are generated as
well which is again another separate
issue if you generate two ideas choosing
among them i would say is free will
being aware that you're having them at
all that would be consciousness but the
thing is we don't understand how it is
that we generate ideas hence what i said
earlier in my introduction to this that
if we have an understanding of what this
program is called the mind running on
the brain then we'll have a better
understanding of how it is that ideas
arise at the level of the mind which is
the level that we would talk about we
wouldn't be talking about the firing of
particular neurons i think that would be
a mistake after all we could take the
brain whatever it is simulate it in a
computer and there would not be neurons
firing presumably because we'd be able
to do away with the neurons replace them
with something else perhaps simulated
transistors perhaps we could just do
away with all of that and we have
nothing but the code running in some
abstract way to produce ideas i happen
to think that would be unethical and for
the re for the reasons that i explain
elsewhere in my nexus video we probably
shouldn't be simulating people thinking
people inside of laptop computers
because hey you'd be a thinking person
inside of a laptop computer and that
would possibly not be a pleasant
experience until we know whether or not
it's going to be a plethora experience
or terrible suffering we shouldn't do it
not in reality anyway we could do it in
theory in some way by talking about it
writing on pieces of paper i don't know
so there's still a lot of science so a
lot of knowledge primarily i think in
biology that we need to have and
chemistry that we need to have before we
can explain these things so sam house is
full of it
i'm surprised that um yeah euron says
there we need to have more understanding
in biology and and science and so on i
think following david deutsch it's not
so much about science and biology to
understand the mind and the brain and so
on what humans are doing that is unique
but euron would appreciate this
it's about philosophy you need to
understand the philosophical
underpinnings of what it takes to create
explanatory knowledge for a system to
reason in the way that people do at
their best
that's what's required not an
understanding of more biology i don't
think that's going to help more and more
fine grained detailed understanding of
the structure of the brain neurons and
so forth or chemistry or anything like
that that's not going to help what we
need is a more abstract philosophical
understanding of how ideas are generated
in the first place which is really hard
because presumably they can be that can
be done independently of wet wear meat
brains presumably they can be artificial
general intelligence which won't have a
brain of that kind at all it will be
instantiated in silicon or something
like that of the future
so
that's the way in which we'll have
progress on these things but at the
moment at the moment the computer that
we do have is indeed a meat computer
and i don't know what sam actually said
but all i can say is that describing the
brain as a meat computer is actually
true
not only is it partially true it's
as true a statement as one can make in
science at the moment
but it's not to say it is the complete
story it's not to say it's a full
explanation it's merely a true
description of what the brain is it's a
meat computer does that tell you
everything no does it tell you much at
all hardly anything because you know to
say that i've got a computer in my
pocket doesn't really tell you anything
about what program it's running you know
how how it's running what it's running
how fast it's running so on and so forth
etc etc okay but but merely saying it's
computer is true
it's true it's true to say that my
iphone is computer it's true to say my
macbook is computer it's true to say my
brain is a computer i'm not demeaning it
by saying that in any way shape or form
because it's doing something that no
other computer in the universe apart
from all those computers that exist
inside the skulls of my fellow human
beings is doing namely creating
knowledge okay which is completely
different to every other computer and
that's the great mystery it doesn't
demean it by saying it's a computer
by taking the existence state of
knowledge
and thinking that it's it we're done
and
the only possible therefore explanation
of consciousness is what i know which is
just zero wants
no
so i
i agree that we don't take the state of
knowledge right now and regard it as
final i'm the first one to say that but
we have to take our best ideas seriously
and so i don't know what the ultimate
constituents of mata are i don't but i
know that the standard model provides us
our best
explanation right now at this time we
say the electron is fundamental we say
the quarks are fundamental we say the
photons are fundamental but that's not
to say that we just give up and say well
we're never going to learn anything
further but i can explain whatever
anything is made of in my room right now
i can see the light coming from the
ceiling lights they're the photons i can
see the desk i can say it's made of
atoms and i can go into detail about how
the quarks and the electrons work there
i'm not giving up
but just because i say that the human
brain is a meat computer doesn't mean
i'm giving up it just means i'm using
the best theory i have right now and
until someone comes along with a better
idea and i haven't heard one except for
these weird supernatural crazy ideas
about the brain as an antenna or the
brain as tapping into cosmic
consciousness or something like that or
the brain is panned psychic or whatever
you pick your weird theory or or on the
other hand saying we don't know anything
and we can't make any claims whatsoever
i think all of that is wrong what we
should do is to take seriously our best
ideas at the moment and our best idea at
the moment is
following the church
turing deutsche principle
all physical processes are computable
what the brain is doing is a physical
process it is computing stuff it's
taking inputs it's processing it it's
giving us outputs but beyond that we
can't say much more but it's not a
vacuous statement it's not a fully
explanatory statement but nor is it
vacuous and it is not false
thank you everyone and i hope everyone
enjoyed that until next time bye
[Music]